### Disaster Reduction and Response

Disaster events tend to affect large areas. The impact of such events can disrupt the normal functioning and organization of local authorities. Remote sensing information is immensely useful to gain oversight of the current situation after an event and to identify areas that are most affected. In the agriculture sector, remote sensing data is increasingly used for estimating crop yields to develop early warning systems for famines. Satellite image based coastline displacement and river bank erosion monitoring is also an important instrument to measure vulnerability of urban areas to flooding, storm surges, and tsunamis. While urban land cover maps are used to estimate impervious surfaces to track and manage water runoff patterns and sewer systems. Satellite imagery contributing to the mapping of informal settlements also helps access vulnerabilities.

Daily imaging will make it possible to prepare for, and track disasters as they occur. To "rewind" to immediately before a disaster, and support the recovery process. Time is a critical factor for disaster response. The quicker images can be distributed to measure impact and develop response strategies. Recent events such as the Nepal earthquake show the importance and usefulness of near real time satellite imagery. Having images taken shortly after disaster events can be immensely helpful to assist disaster response on the ground. Such images inform damage assessments and provide information on what infrastructure still exists for rescue efforts to reach affected areas. Better distribution approaches will be critical in allowing satellite data and analysis to get to responders as quickly as possible. Furthermore, before disasters happen, satellite images can provide means to reduce the vulnerabilities, and prepare for different scenarios. E.g. high resolution digital elevation maps are critical for evaluating the risk of floods, landslides, and earthquakes.
